>>JOANNA RUSHTON: Cyndi, a
very warm welcome to you,
and thank you so
much for joining us.
I know how busy you are.
I'm really very grateful.
Before we get started, what--
I'd love just to connect with
our audience and a little bit
about your background,
because I know that you've
had an interesting professional
career to finally get
to where you are right now.
Can you share a little
bit about that for us?
>>CYNDI O'MEARA: Well, I
wanted to ski in Colorado,
and that's where it all started.
And I thought,
well, I'm not going
to waste my year just skiing,
I'll go to university there.
So I went to the University
of Colorado and did premed.
And one of the
classes that I did
that went for the
12-month period
was cultural anthropology
and anthropology,
and I got very excited
about how food helped
us evolve through hunter
gatherers, agriculturalists,
through to herding society,
Industrial Revolution.
So I got very
excited about that.
So I thought, I'll come back
to Australia and I'll do my--
I'll become a dietitian.
So I'm finishing off my
bachelor of science, majoring
in nutrition, and
I'm looking at what
I'm being taught
and looking at what
I'm going to have to
say as a dietitian--
because you're under
strict regulation
of the diabetic diet, the heart
disease diet, the this diet
and the that diet.
And I didn't agree
with any of it.
So I thought, well, I
can't be a dietitian.
So I thought, well, I'll
go back to university
and I'll become a chiropractor.
So I did two years of
human anatomy, which
is what that first
two years was about--
so pathology,
histology, embryology,
every -ology you
could possibly do.
And at end of, you know,
nearly six years of study,
I just went, I don't
know if I really
want to be a chiropractor.
I don't know if I really
want to study anymore.
I love food.
I love nutrition.
Can I teach the
type of nutrition
that I learned in cultural
anthropology and the food
that we ate then?
And not be under the
registration of the Dietetics
Association?
And teach my own?
And so I, at 24, said,
well, I'm going to do it.
And I did.
And that was 31 years ago
that I started to do that.
And now I own a company
called Changing Habits.
And that company is all
about foset foods, so
foods that are organic,
sustainable, ethical,
and trusted.
People know they can trust
me when I bring a food out.
I have an education
program that is worldwide.
And of course, we have
programs and protocols.
So we've come a long way from
the days when I thought, can I
teach this, to just
stepping outside the square
and teaching something
very different.
Although what I'm seeing now,
from 30 years ago to now,
is that everybody's
coming on board.
Everybody's realizing the
importance of nutrition.
Whereas before,
nobody realized it.
>>JOANNA: I know.
I'm thinking to
myself, you know,
you were light
years ahead of where
the government recommendations
of diet, as you say, you know,
Heart Foundation, et cetera.
And you know, that's
why I love your work,
because in Changing Habits, you
really do push the boundaries.
And you know, you
knock up against what
is considered the right
diet or the right choice.
And you really dispel some
myths and nutritional myths.
And I have an enormous amount
of respect for you for that,
because it is challenging
in today's society,
and the information
out there isn't always
easy to mull through and
know what is the right thing
to follow and not the
right thing to follow.
And one of the subjects
that I'm wanting
us to talk about
today, which I'm
really, really excited about--
because I think that
for our audience,
when they're looking to
overcome depression, anxiety,
and when looking at--
for us in the
Healthy Me summits,
we've decided to look
through the lenses
of seven pillars of health.
And today, you're talking
through the pillar
of nutrition.
And I think one of the sides of
nutrition that a lot of people
aren't understanding is the
relationship between what
we call the brain and gut axes.
And so I'm hoping that today
we can dispel some myths
and also give some clearer
understanding about
the relationship between
the gut and the brain,
because, you know,
latest research
is showing us that
things like Parkinson's
that was thought to
be something as simple
as just a dopamine deficiency
is now actually being looked at,
with the latest research,
as actually a gut issue.
So can you kind of just
set up for our audience
a little bit more
clearer understanding
of why it's so important
to look at the relationship
between the two?
>>CYNDI: Oh, wow.
Put it this way.
A lot of people don't
look at the fact
that everything they
put into their mouth
makes every part of their body,
from their eyes to their hair
to their brain to the chemicals
that make the brain work to,
you know, the toenail.
And you put junk in,
you're going to get junk.
You put good stuff
in, you are going
to get good stuff
that comes out.
And the gut is a barrier to
what is good for the body
and what's not
good for the body.
So we chew our food, we
put it through our stomach.
The stomach is high
in hydrogen chloride.
That kills any
bacterial parasites.
Then-- by rights, this is
what should be happening.
And then, we go into
the small intestine,
where everything's digested.
And anything that's not
digested goes into the gut.
And then bacteria work on that
and get more nutrition out
of it, or extract
the water out of it,
or whatever it
needs to do in order
to do biochemical reactions
for us to even survive more.
And to be healthy.
So the gut bacteria, the
genetics of the gut bacteria
is 90% us.
We are only 10%
genetically human.
Whereas that bacteria
is 90% genetically us.
And a lot of people have
a hard concept with this.
So keeping the gut
healthy means that we have
a barrier against any disease--
any parasites, any
bacteria that shouldn't
be there, any foods
that shouldn't be there.
So it's a protective mechanism.
But it's also a place where
we, our immune system,
starts to act, where
digestion starts,
where absorption utilization,
where more vitamins
and minerals are made.
So when you're
putting good foods in
and foods that we have evolved
to eat, as opposed to just
made by science--
and science has said, this
is the best food for us--
then we have a
disconnect with what
is actually happening
with our physical body
and our mental brain.
And a lot of people
look here, and they go,
well, this is all
about the physical,
and this is all
about the mental.
But what we're realizing is that
most of our serotonin, which
is our neurotransmitters,
and our dopamine
and our noradrenaline,
is made in the gut.
And then stimulates the brain.
Yes, it's made in the brain,
as well, but a lot of it
is made in the gut.
So there's this-- we're just
starting to understand this
and we're starting
to learn this.
And look, I love the research.
We don't know
everything, by the way.
We're just learning this.
This is just a new
science that's happening.
>>JOANNA: I know.
It's a very exciting
side of science
that's really coming through
with some amazing research.
So what sort of
functions is the brain
responsible for that influences
the gut and vice versa?
>>CYNDI: Well, they're always
influencing each other.
And when you think about--
let's just take
the hypothalamus,
for instance, which
is part of the brain.
The hypothalamus produces
a hormone called TSH,
which stimulates the thyroid.
And from there, that
thyroid produces
a hormone called T4,
which then converts
to T3, which then affects
every single cell in the body,
including the gut cells.
So that's just one little organ
in the brain that is affecting
every cell in your body.
So if that's not
working properly--
you're not producing the TSH,
you're not making enough T4
to convert to T3, which
means the cells don't have
any metabolism, then you
get very tired and sluggish
and the gut doesn't work.
And there's these-- and there's
so much influence and so much
feedback through
the two systems.
So, like, I'm just
talking about one thing.
There are so many
feedback loops.
So we now see the pineal
gland and the production
of melatonin, what that
does with its opposition
to serotonin.
So all of these things,
you cannot separate them.
There is no way you
can separate them.
You cannot separate the
brain from the body.
And you cannot separate
the body from the brain.
Even what you think,
we're finding,
influences epigenetically
what's happening in your body,
as well.
And I don't think it's
the sole and only thing.
But it is one of the
factors that we now see.
And if you look at
Bruce Lipton's work,
you will see how
our thinking changes
so much about our physical
and mental capacities.
>>JOANNA: So what
sort of symptoms
does an individuals
start to experience
if there is an imbalance,
let's say, in the gut,
perhaps around dysbiosis.
How does that start
to show up and affect
their mental and
emotional mood or state?
>>CYNDI: Well, one of the
things that has been indicated--
and this is through work,
through many people that are
looking at the
brain gut access--
is that the nervous system is
the first thing to be affected.
If your gut isn't
working and you
don't have any diarrhea or
constipation or dysbiosis
in any way, as far as
SIBO or inflammatory bowel
disease, or ulcerative colitis,
or Crohn's, or celiac--
if none of that is presenting,
then what may present
is a nervous system problem.
And that can be with
Parkinson's, as you talked
about, multiple sclerosis.
It also could be
the way we think.
And it could act on depression
and anxiety and psychosis
or schizophrenia.
So we're actually
seeing that the--
while you may not
feel it in the gut,
it may be affecting
your nervous system.
And the nervous system is
attached to everything.
So it could even
be a skin problem.
So when you look at the
branches of the nervous system,
it goes to every
part of the body.
So every system
of the body can be
affected as a
result of dysbiosis
or a gut problem
that's happening.
>>JOANNA: So what I'm
hearing there is, literally,
no matter what the unfavorable
symptoms or sign is that you're
experiencing, we
mustn't rule out
looking at the health of the gut
as being possibly problematic
or contributing towards whatever
that sign or symptom is--
that that individual
is experiencing?
>>CYNDI: Well, that's
what we're learning.
Once upon a time, we looked
at the symptom, and we said,
oh, well, this person's
got anxiety and depression.
Let's, you know,
give them a drug
that will help them with their
serotonin issues, you know.
There was a chemical
imbalance in the brain--
that was always the thing that
we believed was happening.
Or if there was a skin issue,
then we would give a cream.
And so on and so on.
We were giving drugs
to the symptom,
but we weren't
looking at the cause.
And when we start to
look at the cause,
we have to start
looking at the gut.
Of course, there are other
things that we need to look at.
But that's where
we're realizing,
if we can get that
gut fixed, then
perhaps we can help what's
happening throughout the body,
whatever symptom that might be.
And that's the scary thing,
is that the gut is not
that easy to fix.
Everyone says, oh,
it's easy to fix.
But for some people, it's not.
It's not easy to fix, because
there's so many issues.
So there could be--
they've been taking antacid
so they don't have enough acid.
It could be their
pancreas is not working,
so they're not getting enough
enzymes to digest food.
It could be that they
have a motility problem
in the small
intestine, so they've
got a backup of bugs that are
coming from the large intestine
into a fairly sterile
small intestine.
>>JOANNA: So by motility, you
mean the movement of our feces?
>>CYNDI: Of food.
>>JOANNA: Of food?
>>CYNDI: Of food going
from the stomach,
like empties out of
the stomach, and then
there's a motility problem
in the small intestine, which
doesn't move the food
through fast enough,
and some bacteria come
into the small intestine
from the large intestine
that shouldn't be there.
And we have something
called SIBO,
which is an
overgrowth of bacteria
in the small intestine.
And we're finding
people get bloated
and they get very uncomfortable.
But then, what
they do is they eat
a food that feeds the bacteria
in the small intestine,
and they become very irritable
and anxious about things
and mad about things and angry.
So that then feeds up
into their brain, which
then causes these problems.
And it could be a passing thing,
that they've eaten something,
it's fed the bacteria,
the bacteria are
going wild and
having a great time,
because they're happy,
they're being fed,
which then feeds
up to the brain.
And I've see-- I see
people when they eat a food
and have that effect
and how irritated they
get about things.
Like, you might do
something and they'll say,
don't do that, you know?
And you'll know that
they never usually
get irritated about that.
>>JOANNA: Wow.
So it's almost as
if the microbiome
is reacting and causing us
to the change in the brain
chemistry.
And then how we behave
as a result of that.
>>CYNDI: Definitely.
How you behave, how you
tolerate people, how you--
little things may irritate you.
So maybe the phone's
too loud, or you
know-- it is actually
fascinating to watch when
you actually know when
someone's on a really good diet
and they've eliminated
the foods that they
know are causing the problem.
This isn't still
fixing the problem.
It's just not
feeding the bacteria
that is causing the problem.
And you see them eat a
food, and in 30 minutes,
you see them change.
It's just-- and then--
>>JOANNA: I
experienced it myself.
I know-- I know exactly
what you're talking about.
And it is.
It's an amazing experience
to have, to actually
be conscious enough to
notice and witness what
certain foods and reactions
certain foods, you know,
elicit within you.
And whether that's a
physical reaction, i.e.,
to feel more bloated
or heavy or more
gas, or any of those
physical signs,
versus the mental
and the emotional.
I mean, I've experienced what
it's like to eat certain foods
and actually increase my
levels of anxiety as a result.
So I guess what
I'd love to do is
be able to go through
the sort of lifestyle
choices, especially
around food, that
start to impact this imbalance.
So you know, we talk a lot
about dysbiosis as the beginning
point of that then
creating the opportunity
for us to become a host to--
whether it's a fungal
overgrowth or a parasite
or the various other things
that you've mentioned
that it can feed into.
What are the sort of choices,
the everyday choices,
that people are
making that they don't
realize are actually
contributing
to an imbalance in the gut?
>>CYNDI: You've opened
up a can of worms.
>>JOANNA: Haven't I?
>>CYNDI: Because it can
be the water you drink,
because the water's
got chlorine in it.
Chlorine is there to kill bugs.
You put it into your body and
you start to kill the bugs.
>>JOANNA: So we're killing
the good and the bad?
>>CYNDI: Yes.
Yeah.
And there's a really,
a balance in the gut.
And that balance is between
the good and the bad.
You know, there's
bacteria in the gut.
Like, a lot of people
think that H. pylori, which
is what they've indicated
causes ulcers in the stomach,
is a bad bacteria.
But most people have H. pylori.
It depends on whether
it's overwhelming
the good bacteria as to
whether it causes disease.
So there's a nice balance
that's always happening.
And it's changing
on an hourly basis,
depending on what you're eating,
drinking, exposed to, putting
on your skin, breathing in.
So it's continuously changing--
>>JOANNA: Adapting.
>>CYNDI: It's adapting.
>>JOANNA: Yep.
>>CYNDI: And my belief
is, genetically, we
can't adapt as fast
as those guys can
adapt to what we're consuming.
But do I believe that
the food that we're
consuming, the water
that we're drinking,
the chemicals that
we're exposed to--
do I believe that our
bacteria is adapting
to this as fast as it should?
And I don't think it is.
And that's why I
think we're seeing
the rise in
gastrointestinal problems
and the rise in
depression and anxiety
and psychosis and
schizophrenia and bipolar
that we're now seeing,
is because culturally, we
are driving our evolution,
but our anatomical evolution
and our genetic
evolution is not adapting
to that cultural drive.
So what are our
cultural drives that we
seem to do on a regular
basis cause this dysbiosis
and then cause all
sorts of other issues,
as we've already spoken about?
So cultural drives
are the medications
that we now take, all
the way from antibiotics
to anti acids to the pill.
So these are cultural
things that we think are OK.
And that's what everybody
does, so that's what we do.
>>JOANNA: That we
literally introduced
over the last 50
to 70, 80 years.
>>CYNDI: And really
probably since the '40s,
antibiotics really came in.
Anti acids then became
something that we were doing.
The pill in the '60s.
And we did it, saying, hey,
we have this revolution.
We're now able to help things.
And I think what happens
is that these things are
important in our life,
but then what we're doing
is we now have the consequences
of this cultural push.
And we're not adapting
to this cultural push.
So the medications,
I think, are one.
You know, sanitation.
Chlorinating of water.
We did this so that we wouldn't
get diseases from water,
because that's where
the plague came from,
was it was being spread
because of the water had it.
So we then
chlorinated our water.
But has this been a good
thing for us to adapt to?
And can we adapt to it?
>>JOANNA: And we now have
fluoride in our water, as well.
>>CYNDI: Exactly.
You know, and one
of the consequences
of the fluoride in the water--
are they good and are they bad?
And we're actually
seeing both now,
because they're
now showing people
in fluoridated areas having
higher thyroid issues.
And when you have a look-- if
anybody's listening to this,
they'll know that--
they'll know someone
with a thyroid issue.
20 years ago, we weren't
even talking about this.
So it's our water supply.
It's medications
that we're taking.
What about the sprays that
we're spraying on our foods?
So back in the '40s--
my family's from Iowa, USA.
They were corn farmers.
There was DDT being sprayed.
There was arsenic being sprayed.
So all of these
things were being
sprayed without even considering
the ramifications of it
getting into the food and then
getting into the water supply.
And then that's more
in our water supply.
And now, there's Roundup.
There's a huge herbicide that
is sprayed on our sugarcane,
on our wheat, or before
the wheat is planted,
sometimes, it's used as
the desiccant on our wheat.
Many people eat
wheat all the time.
It's in most of our products.
It's on Roundup soybeans.
It's on Roundup corn, Bt-corn.
It's on any of the Roundup
ready, genetically modified
foods.
And then what about
genetically modified foods?
Not only is the
Roundup the problem,
what about the Bt toxin in corn?
So what that does is
when a little insect eats
a bit of corn, it explodes its
stomach and the insect dies.
So when you eat Bt corn, no,
it's not affecting your cells,
but what about the microbiome
that's in your gut?
It explodes them, destroys them.
So you know, we haven't
even started on food,
where we're just looking at
water supply, medications,
chemicals being sprayed.
All of these things are
affecting the microbiome.
Then we eat these foods that
may be chemically laden,
may have additives,
preservatives, and flavorings
in them, may have hydrogenated
vegetable oil, which
affects the cells of the human
body, which then, in turn,
affects the cascade
effects of our body.
And I just feel that we are
destroying our body's ability
to adapt and to be robust
by all of these things
that we're doing to it.
And can we come back from this?
Well, what I am
seeing now is I am
seeing young women,
young men, babies
that have such dysbiosis
in their microbiome
that it's getting tougher and
tougher to fix these guys.
And when you listen to the
specialists-- so, you know,
I'm listening to,
at the moment--
I have new boyfriends
and new girlfriends.
So my husband always goes,
who are you listening to now?
And so at the moment, I'm
listening to a gentleman
by the name of
Dr. Mark Pimentel.
And he's out of the US.
And he's a specialist on the
gut bacteria, more so dysbiosis
in the small intestine.
And he's just showing
80% of the people,
we might be able
to help with this.
45% we might be able
But is it continuing
and is it long-term?
And I love these
people that are really
looking at the microbiome and
understanding it and seeing
how we can help it.
And can we get past this?
Once we get rid of
the chlorinated water,
once we get rid of all the
medications, once we change
the diet, even if we
do all these things,
are we still
getting them better?
Have we gone past the
point of no return?
That's the question that many
of these scientists are asking.
>>JOANNA: Well, that's big.
That's a very big question.
And it's a scary
one to contemplate.
And I think that
what's really important
is that whilst we are
still here and that we
are able to make
a choice that can
be supportive in
the next moment,
you know, for ourselves
from a health perspective?
Can we come back specifically
and look at food?
And for the audience that--
you know, your everyday person,
who probably still
shops at the likes
of Kohl's or Woolworth's--
if you're here in Australia--
and how we can bring
awareness to how
to educate ourselves
around reading labels
more effectively?
>>CYNDI: Yes.
>>JOANNA: Or, you know--
because I always believed,
as a health coach myself, one of
the things I'm always creating
is a Rainbow Bridge
for my clients.
They're here and they
want to be over here.
But you know, that's
a massive step.
And we need to break
those steps down.
And it really depends
on where they're at
and how far they need to go.
And a lot of times, I say to
my clients, keep going shopping
where you normally go, and
if it's the supermarket,
start shopping on
the parameters.
Stop going down
the middle aisles.
But if we were to break it
down and give our audience
some really simple
go-tos around how
to improve the quality
of their food, what would
some of-- what
would you tell them?
What would the top
three things you'd tell
them to stay away from?
And the top three
things that you
would ask them to have more of?
>>CYNDI: Yeah.
You know, I love people
that are just starting out,
because you can make leaps and
bounds just with one change.
You can make a huge leap.
It's the people that
have tried everything
that are still struggling
that are the tough ones.
So this is exciting to be
here, where people are still
eating breakfast cereals
and margarine and toast
and Vegemite and Lean Cuisine
and all of those foods,
because you know
you're going to make
a big difference in their life.
And it's like medication.
We know that antidepressants
work for the short-term.
They never work long-term.
And in the end, they're
worse long-term.
So we know that food is going
to work in the beginning.
And it will work long-term.
And it will be the
batter choice in what
we do if we take that as one
of the pillars of health.
And so, this is exciting.
So what would be my top
three things to avoid?
Well, let's just do one.
And my top one would be stay
away from all packaged foods.
And once you understand that
most packaged foods are merely
foods that have been--
what would I call it--
upgraded or upscaled to make
you think that a grain of wheat
can taste better than
it actually does--
because, you know, you
eat a grain of wheat,
it's disastrous.
It doesn't taste good.
And you wouldn't chomp
on a grain of wheat.
But if we can look at
that grain of wheat
and we can maybe
bake it or extrude it
as breakfast cereals
are, and we can
add some flavors to it and
some colors and a bit of sugar
and add a sultana to it, then
it becomes something worthwhile.
So if I was to buy
wheat from the farmer,
it might cost me
$1 a kilo for it.
But when I'm buying
a breakfast cereal
in a package, that has all
these additives, preservatives,
and flavorings in it, they'll
charge me $7 for 250 grams.
So to me, people have to
realize that it was just
a grain of wheat, and
this is what it is now.
So what they're adding
to it is what's scary.
Is that, they add a
preservative to it.
The reason they add
a preservative to it
is that they actually
don't want it to go off.
So when you consume
it, you're really
adding a preservative
that stops bacteria.
Once again, you're
destroying the microbiome.
So number one is, stay
away from packaged foods.
If you do want to have
some packaged foods--
because we have to buy
our sugar or our salt
or our chia seeds or
our foods in packaging--
read the ingredients, as opposed
to reading the nutritional
labels.
So most people look at
a label, and they'll
go, well, what's the fat?
Protein?
Carbohydrate?
What are the vitamins and
minerals, the salt content?
They're more
concerned with that.
And a manufacturer can
manipulate anything they want
and make it look like that,
by manipulating the food.
But what I want to
look at is, I want
to know what are
the ingredients?
What's the top
ingredient in there?
And if it's sugar, and
it's white sugar or multi
dextrose, which is made from
wheat or corn, which could have
Roundup on it, then
I'm going to go,
well, this isn't
good for my body,
it's not good for my microbiome.
And if I do have
dysbiosis, I'm going
to be feeding the bad
ones, and I'm just
going to get worse
and worse and worse.
So number one, stay away
from packaged foods.
If you are going to have
some packaged foods,
read the ingredients.
If it looks like a
chemical laboratory,
be a little bit careful.
And see if it looks
like the foods that
was in your
grandmother's kitchen,
or your great grandmother's
kitchens, if there's
20-year-olds listening
to this, or 16-year-olds
listening to this.
So, yeah.
It's that-- that
would be number one.
Number two, read the
ingredients if you are.
Number three would be--
what to stay away from?
Your refined oils.
You know, look at the oils and
the fats that you're consuming.
>>JOANNA: So what
would-- what would you
describe as a refined oil?
>>CYNDI: Number one,
margarine is a refined oil.
And then you've got canola oil,
you've got a rice bran oil.
I want people to really think
about rice bran oil, OK?
So bran is a fiber.
The germ is the oil.
So how do you get
fat out of bran?
So, like, I looked at that and
went, how can you have-- how
do you get fat out of rice bran?
That doesn't-- it
just doesn't compute.
People don't think.
>>JOANNA: I totally get that.
And I have the same sort
of questioning moment
when I'm looking at getting
milk out of an almond or out
of rice.
And, you know, I'm still not--
I kind of sit on the fence
on that one, looking at--
I've seen-- my problem with
those commercial almond
or rice milks is that when
you look on the label,
they've been extended with oils.
Often, the vegetable
oils or the canola oil
that you're talking about.
>>CYNDI: And the thickener
in it, guar gum, usually.
And then they'll
put a sugar in it
or they'll put a flavor in it,
because it's got no flavor.
Really, rice milk has
no flavor whatsoever.
Neither does soya, by the way.
If you get real soya milk, it's
a very woody, bland tasting
thing.
But we in the
Western world don't
want to drink that
soya milk, so we add
things to make it taste good.
>>JOANNA: That's
just crazy, isn't it?
OK.
So I've got three--
around what we're
talking about right now,
there's three questions
that are coming to my mind.
One is to just help our
audience get really clear
on the processed oils that
we want to stay away from,
and giving them a little bit
of an understanding as to why.
OK?
That's one of them.
The second thing is, because I
brought up almond milk and rice
milk, I'd love for you just
to give your opinion on,
are they the healthy
dairy alternative?
And then the third thing
is, we just bought up soya--
and I think, again, there's
a lot of research that's
coming out about soya
and extruded soya
and how it's also a neurotoxin.
So you know, the fact that
we're talking about anxiety
and depression, I think it's
really important that we just
clarify for our audience.
So can we look at
those three in detail?
>>CYNDI: Yea, sure.
So first was the oils.
So if I was to give a really
simple example of this,
what's the difference between
a good fat and a bad fat?
A lot of people think
saturated, monounsaturated,
polyunsaturated, should have
omega-3, should have DHA, EPA--
forget all of that.
Just forget all of that, because
you don't need to know that.
So to me, a good fat
is a fat that we've
eaten for thousands
and thousands of years.
So there are animal fats.
There are butters.
And people will be like, what?
Why is she saying this?
I've been told I should be
eating margarine and vegetable
oils.
So we didn't stop
making vegetable oils
until the Industrial Revolution.
Before that, we ate it
in their real form--
in nuts and seeds
and avocados and meat
and butters and creams.
That was how we did our fats.
So the good fats are
the fats from nature.
They're the ones that have
not been changed in a chemical
laboratory.
So margarine started in the
1920s as wax for your candles
and fat for your soap.
That was how margarine
started, if you really want
to know the nitty gritty of it.
>>JOANNA: Is it true
that it's like a molecule
away from plastic?
>>CYNDI: Well, it could be.
And I have done a
little test on this.
I got some margarine about 2009
and I put it in my cupboard
and let it go.
Just let it be.
And you look at it
now, and there's
this plastic layer
across it, quite
hardy plastic layer of it.
It hasn't gone off,
nothing's eaten it.
None of the cockroaches
in Queensland want it.
No ants have gotten to it.
Nothing wants it.
>>JOANNA: So it says
a lot in itself.
>>CYNDI: Yeah.
And whereas, when
we look at butter--
butter, we've been eating
for maybe 10, 20,000 years,
where we--
we used to rob an animal
that maybe had a baby on it,
and we might have thought, oh,
we can have some of that milk,
and then they figured out how
to churn it and make butter.
So a good fat is a natural fat.
A bad fat, to me, is a
refined fat or a fat that's
come manipulated in some way.
That could be hydrogenation,
interesterification,
or fractionation.
But don't be obsessed
with those terminologies.
Just look at it and go, like
canola oil, vegetable oil--
all of these will
either be genetically
modified, have some
chemicals sprayed on it,
extracted through solvents.
So I'm just very
wary of those oils.
And there's something we've
only eaten for probably
about 150 years of those oils.
>>JOANNA: And what are they--
because I hear the term a lot
that they are oxidated.
So they cause
cellular oxidation.
Can you just describe
what's happening
at a cell level that is then
affecting the microbiome yet
again?
>>CYNDI: Yeah.
So oxidation means-- a saturated
fat means that all of the bonds
are saturated.
It doesn't oxidize, because
oxygen can't go on a bond.
Whereas a polyunsaturated can
oxidize, because it's poly,
unsaturated.
Means there's lots of
bonds that can be oxidized,
so an oxygen molecule can go on.
So that's what oxidation is.
And the oxidation
requires antioxidants
to take that oxygen molecule off
so it doesn't cause rancidity
or it doesn't
cause free radicals
in our body, which
then causes aging.
If we practically look at
what we're actually saying,
like the antioxidant, the
oxidation-- so the antioxidant
helps with the oxidation.
And oxidation is happening
all the time in your body.
And you're producing
antioxidants.
In actual fact, things
like turmeric, coffee,
believe it or not,
ashwagandha, broccoli,
enhance the body's
or the cell's nucleus
to start a pathway that
produces antioxidants.
So we know how to
handle these things.
So if oxidation is
happening, it doesn't matter.
But if you have gone
over the extreme
and you're having way too
much oxidation is happening
because of the foods you're
consuming, the chemicals that
are around, et
cetera, then that's
when we start to break down.
And that starts to break down
the cells, which not only break
down the physical body,
but it breaks down
the cells in the brain.
And remembering that
the brain is fat--
so without the good
fats, your brain
will not have the structure,
and then it won't function.
And many of the
neurotransmitters
are produced from fats,
especially cholesterol.
So many of neurotransmitters
come from that.
So I'm-- because of my
anthropological love
and my love of cultures-- and
that's where it all started
from--
is that I always go
back to these cultures.
But people have to realize
that there are cultures out
there that ate all carbs,
and there are cultures out
there that ate all fat,
there that ate all protein.
So don't get hung up on
how much fat should I
have, how much carbs?
It's about going back
to the real foods.
And so that-- that's probably
my number one thing, as far
as what should we be doing?
We should be eating real foods.
That's where we
should be starting.
Your second part to this
was, what about the milks
that are out there?
Well, why are we having a
problem with dairy milk?
That's my question.
There are cultures like
the Himbas in Namibia--
there's another--
and they're still
living their traditional lives.
They eat nothing
but meat and dairy.
>>JOANNA: And the Swedish,
up in the Alps in Sweden.
>>CYNDI: Yeah.
And there's a group
in the Panna--
Panna, I think it
is, in Afghanistan--
all they do is--
they're pastoralists or herders.
All they do is eat meat and
drink milk, or fermented milks.
So we know there are cultures
that can handle milk.
Why, all of a sudden, was I
drinking milk in 1960 and 1970?
Because I had to, because
that was the playground
thing that you
had to do, you had
your first part of the morning,
everybody got some milk.
And everybody tolerated it.
Why are we having a
problem with it now?
And that's why these nut
milks and these have all
come into vogue.
It's because people
can't handle milk.
And they want milk.
So what do I think about them?
Look, if you make them
yourself, that's cool.
You know, they're great,
because then you know
what you're putting into them.
But many of the Tetra Paks,
I look at the ingredients,
and they've got the
refined oils in them.
They may have
white salt in them.
citric acid in them,
which is made from a
genetically modified mold.
You know, these are the
things that people don't--
they think it's just from
lemon juice, but it's not.
>>JOANNA: Yep.
>>CYNDI: And then the third
part of what you asked was--
>>JOANNA: Looking at the soya.
>>CYNDI: Oh, soya.
That's right.
You know, I don't have
a problem with soya.
I think the way the
Asians ate soya was OK.
4% of the diet, probably.
But they probably
had organic soya.
They fermented it.
They knew how to get rid
of the anti-nutrients,
because there are at least
five anti-nutrients in soya.
And they prepared it properly
via culture and tradition.
It's a bit like
the Aboriginals--
they ate a lot of toxic foods
that many of us would die from.
In actual fact,
Burke and Wills did
die from eating a toxic food.
They didn't die from lack
of water or lack of food.
They died because they had
a toxic food, because it
wasn't prepared properly.
The Aboriginals were brilliant
at their cultural tradition
and understanding food and
what they had to do to it.
We've lost that.
We think we can
just make a food out
of additives,
preservatives, flavorings,
refined oils, and fake foods,
and genetically modified foods,
and it's going to be OK for
us, and we can adapt to that.
And we can't.
So I stay away from soya because
of what they've done to it.
So is food the problem?
Or is it what they've done to
it that's actually the problem?
And my belief is
it's what they've
done to it that is the
biggest problem of all.
And if we can get back to our
real food-- so number one is,
let's get back to real foods.
And if you're just starting
out on this, as you said,
you know, just go around the
outskirts of the supermarket.
Just get your fruits and
vegetables and your meat
and your unadulterated dairies.
Maybe start there.
And then once you've done
that, what's your next step?
Well, maybe go to
your farmer's markets.
Start collecting,
hunting, and gathering
at your farmers' markets.
And talk to your
farmers and talk
to the people that are
getting that food in-- that
would probably be a
really good thing.
>>JOANNA: To start to know where
your food's actually coming?
>>CYNDI: Exactly.
>>JOANNA: What processes
it's going through?
>>CYNDI: My belief
is if you are not
interested in the
production of your food,
you're not interested
in your health.
Really, that is a
big belief of mine,
is that when you understand
where this food is coming from
and the love that
farmer has for the land,
and that he's not throwing
Roundup, killing the soil,
killing the microbiota
of the soil,
of our microbiome-- this is
our soil, we carry it with us.
The plants have to have
their soil, as well.
You kill the microorganisms
in that soil,
you kill the ability for
that plant to be healthy,
just as you kill our soil,
you kill the ability for us
to be healthy.
So I would say,
number two, start
doing the farmers' markets.
Then you start to
eat seasonally.
And number three, what
would be my number--
maybe make things from
scratch, because once you
start to do those, you're
going to have to make things
from scratch anyway.
And you knowing where
your food's coming from,
so that's going
to happen anyway.
I think become educated
would be number three.
Understand what's
happening out there.
Look at more of these summits.
Listen to more of these summits.
And become educated.
And don't be somebody who
has willful blindness.
And willful blindness
is information
that you should know,
that's out there,
but somehow, you
manage not to know.
And there's a lot of willful
blindness happening out
there at the moment in
our medical community,
in our food industry.
Willful blindness is
actually a legal term.
And--
>>JOANNA: Wow.
So it's really about
taking accountability
and responsibility.
>>CYNDI: Definitely.
>>JOANNA: And not sitting
in that, as you say,
willful blindness.
And I think one of
the biggest messages
is what we've spoken
about, is that there
are some simple things that we
can start doing today to help
improve the diet, to
improve the microbiome,
to help us therefore improve
and stabilize our mood,
to manage our anxiety
levels more effectively.
And that it doesn't
have to be complicated.
And that there are
some simple things
we can do to help ourselves.
>>CYNDI: And I think
it's one step at a time.
>>JOANNA: Yep.
>>CYNDI: So if
someone's feeling a bit
overwhelmed right now, because
I've talked about water supply
and where do we get our foods
from, all you have to do
is go, OK, well, what
can I change right now?
This week, what can I do?
And it might be as simple as
throwing the white salt out
and bringing in some
salt that's unrefined,
such as our beautiful
Himalayan sea salts.
Or they're not sea, but they're
crystal salts, so rock salts.
So bringing in
something like that.
It may be as easy as
saying, hey, you know what?
I'm going to change
my breakfast.
I'm not going to have breakfast
cereals, which we know,
actually, we know that it
increases our serotonin levels,
which is the calming, I
really don't do too much, I
can actually have a little
bit of a sleep right now,
neurotransmitter.
As opposed to proteins that
increase dopamine, which
is your get up and go,
I want to be motivated,
I want to do things
neurotransmitter.
So when you say, well,
let me just start there.
That's all I need to do.
Maybe it's change your salt,
or maybe change your breakfast.
Why don't I actually look at
the milk that I'm drinking?
Is it pasteurized, homogenized,
skim trimmed, rev shaped,
or can I buy a milk
that's less processed?
Remember, it's not the
food that's the problem.
It's what they've done
to the food that's
the biggest problem of all.
>>JOANNA: Yeah.
Quality.
>>CYNDI: Quality.
It's about quality,
not quantity.
>>JOANNA: Absolutely.
As I've learned myself, when
you really qualify the quality,
you actually just don't
need as much, you know?
>>CYNDI: And you're
not counting calories.
You need to do all that stuff.
It's just quality.
>>JOANNA: Yeah, that's another
really big one, as well,
I think.
Wow.
You know, so many
things I'd love
to talk to you about
further, and we will.
We'll have other
opportunities that we
can touch on other things that,
again, come back to, relate
to, how we can manage our mood
and our state of well-being.
I do have one last
question to ask you.
And we're asking this of all
of our wonderful speakers.
And the main reason for this is
because all of our philosophers
over time have said the
same thing, and that is--
and neuroscience is
now validating it--
and that is that we come to
believe what we tell ourselves,
and our brain believes
what we tell it.
And the-- I know what
a wonderful lover
you are of Wayne Dyer, and
he lived by the statement of,
"I am", and what
we tell ourselves
and what we reaffirm
to ourselves.
And how through the power
of the "I am" statement,
we are affecting the
epigenetics of ourselves.
So what would be
literally your "I am".
If you woke up every
morning, and you
had to program yourself, what
would the "I am" programming
be?
>>CYNDI: Wow.
You know, I was brought
up knowing this.
My dad was teaching
me this at 15.
He introduced me to
Wayne Dyer in the '70s,
when I was a teenager.
So I was brought up
doing this all the time.
And I know I've tried to
teach my children that.
But there are many
people out there
that are brought up with
their parents yelling at them,
or telling them you're no
good, or things like that.
So for me, I just know.
I know who I am
as a human being.
I know my capacity to be great.
And I don't say
that egotistically.
I say that because who
are we to play small?
We must play great.
And if we're not--
if we have this thing--
and Melissa Ambrosini
calls it the "mean girl."
You know, it's that girl that's
going, "you can't do that."
In your own mind,
you're saying this.
Whereas I don't think that
way, because I've been
trained to think differently.
And to change that, I think
it's a matter of that you
have to get up in
the morning and you
have to have a statement.
And maybe it's a written
statement, that you write down.
And I am great.
Why not I am great?
>>JOANNA: On your
bathroom mirror?
>>CYNDI: Yeah, exactly.
Why not?
I am great.
And maybe that's-- it
can be as simple as that.
Yeah.
My brother's very much into
the emotional part of health.
And he did a documentary called
"What ate my mother and will
it eat me?"
And it was all about
the emotional health
of our mother, who ate
beautifully, did everything
right, yet died of lung cancer
without a smoke in her hand,
ever, at the age of 69.
And so he really gets
into that emotion.
And whenever we're
having a discussion,
I'm talking about the food,
he's talking about the emotion.
So both are so, so important.
So to answer the question
succinctly now, "I am great".
And we've got to
stop playing small,
because we're not
serving the world
and we're not serving human
beings if we play small.
And I don't intend--
>>JOANNA: We're not
destined for small.
>>CYNDI: No, I don't
intend to play small
and I never wanted
to play small.
And sometimes, I didn't know
whether I had that ability.
And you know what?
I don't have that
ability to do everything.
And that's why I have an
amazing team behind me.
Like, my husband is one of my
most amazing team behind me.
And my girlfriends are there.
And my team that I work
with are in my company.
My husband and my company--
that's who are great
and who are amazing.
And they're just-- we
prop each other up.
And that's another
thing I think is--
make sure you're
being propped up.
Get rid of anything that's
not propping you up.
>>JOANNA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>CYNDI: Yeah.
>>JOANNA: Perfect.
Perfect.
I love it.
I am great.
Wonderful.
Cyndi, thank you so
much for joining us.
It's been an absolute pleasure.
Thank you for your wealth
of knowledge and wisdom
and for helping our audience
navigate through their path.
>>CYNDI: Thank you.